A Reformulated Version of Marx’s Theory of
Ground-Rent Shows that there Cannot be any
              Absolute Rent
                                 Deepankar Basu∗
                                   June 25, 2022



          Forthcoming in the Review of Radical Political Economics.

                                       Abstract
       This paper develops a simple theoretical model to analyze Marx’s the-
       ory of ground rent. Using the model, I demonstrate two important
       results. First, if we take capital outlay as exogenously given, then total
       ground-rent can be decomposed into the three components: differen-
       tial rent of the first variety (DRI), differential rent of the second variety
       (DRII), and absolute rent (AR). Second, if we let the amount of capi-
       tal outlay on each plot of land be determined by the profit-maximizing
       behaviour of capitalist farmers, then absolute rent becomes zero. Nei-
       ther low organic composition of capital nor monopoly power of the
       class of landlords can generate any absolute rent. I conclude that un-
       der reasonable behavioural assumptions about landlords and capitalist
       farmers, there will be no absolute rent in a capitalist economy.
       JEL Codes: B51.
       Key words: ground rent, differential rent, absolute rent.
   ∗
    Department of Economics, UMass Amherst. Email: dbasu@econs.umass.edu. With-
out implicatiing him in any way in the conclusions of this paper, I would like to thank
Debarshi Das and Duncan Foley for extensive and continuing discussions on the Marxist
theory of rent. I would also like to thank three reviewers of RRPE for their insightful
comments.




                                            1
1    Introduction
The theory of ground-rent is an important but relatively under-theorized
part of Marxist political economy. Part of the reason for the lack of theoret-
ical development in this area probably arises from the difficulty scholars face
in clearly and precisely defining the meaning of key terms involved in the
discussion: ground rent, and the three components into which Marx decom-
posed it, i.e. differential rent of the first variety (DRI), differential rent of
the second variety (DRII) and absolute rent (AR). In this paper, I present
a theoretical model to define ground-rent, to decompose it into DRI, DRII
and AR, and to analyze in detail the meaning and source of AR.
    Marx had worked out his theory of ground-rent mainly through numeri-
cal examples and later scholars have largely followed Marx’s approach. The
continued use of simple numerical examples and the difficulty of clearly and
precisely defining key terms involved in the discussion have limited the de-
velopment of Marx’s theory of ground-rent. While there is broad agreement
about the definition of ground-rent as such, there is much less agreement
about the decomposition of ground-rent into its three components: DRI,
DRII and AR. This paper offers a theoretical framework to address these
disagreements and potentially move the literature ahead.
    Two types of disagreements in the extant literature are especially worth
highlighting. The first significant disagreement relates to different views
about the existence, meaning and source of absolute rent (Fine, 1979; Ramirez,
2009; Fine and Filho, 2010). While some scholars view absolute rent as aris-
ing from the class power (or monopoly power) of landlords (Ramirez, 2009),
others contend that the cause of absolute rent is the relatively low organic
composition of capital in agriculture (Fine, 1979, 2019). The theoretical
framework developed in this paper will be able to throw light on this dis-
agreement.
    The second disagreement relates to the meaning of DRI and DRII. In
addressing this disagreement, it is important to note that there was, for a
long time, no theoretical framework available to implement the intuitions
about these two components of differential rent in a unified manner. Part
of the difficulty in carrying out this decomposition arises from the fact that
defining DRI and DRII require us to use different benchmarks. While DRI
is defined with respect to the least-productive plot of land, DRII is defined
with respect to the least- productive unit of capital. Most scholars, following
Marx, have addressed DRI and DRII one at a time, but have not been able

                                       2
to integrate them together into a single theoretical framework (Fine, 1979;
Fine and Filho, 2010).
    Das (2018) offered the first coherent theoretical framework to understand
the three components of ground-rent in a unified manner. In this paper, I
follow and extend the analysis in Das (2018). In particular, I modify two key
components of the analysis in Das (2018). Whereas Das (2018) had assumed
that increments of capital outlay occur in discrete units, I allow capital outlay
to increase continuously. This is important because it is difficult to justify
discrete changes in capital outlay. While it is true that agricultural produc-
tion involve fixed costs that can be lumpy, the variable cost of production is
likely to vary continuously. Hence, total capital outlay is more realistically
modeled as varying continuously, rather than in discrete amounts.
    The second modification is even more important. Where Das (2018) had
assumed that the amount of capital outlay on each plot of land is given,
I probe deeper and ask: how much capital will be invested on any plot of
land? Since plots of land are operated by capitalist farmers, a natural way to
answer this question is to see what level of capital outlay will maximize the
capitalist farmer’s profit. In this paper, I show that this modification has far
reaching consequences. If capitalist farmers choose the level of capital outlay
to maximize the profit income they earn, then there will be no absolute rent.
This is the most important result of this paper. In general, I show that
absolute rent will be zero. The analysis in this paper shows that neither a
relatively low organic composition of capital in agriculture Fine (1979) nor
the class power of landlords Ramirez (2009) can generate absolute rent.
    The overall significance of Marx’s theory of rent, and its clarification
in this paper, is two fold. On the one hand, it is a component part of
his theory of the distribution of surplus value in capitalist economies. It
explains the origin of the source of income of landlords and other resource
owners as a fragment of the surplus value produced through the exploitation
of labour. Marx understood ground-rent in a capitalist economy to be a
part of the surplus value that is appropriated by private owners of non-
reproducible resources like land (Marx, 1993). Marx argued that use of the
non-reproducible resource can confer benefits on capitalist producers and
generate what Marx called ‘surplus profit’, i.e. profit over and above what
could be earned at the prevailing uniform (average) rate of profit. Therefore,
private owners of non-reproducible resources can withhold the resource from
the capitalist producers unless the latter agree to make a monetary payment
for its use. In fact, in the process of bargaining between capitalists and

                                       3
resource owners, capitalist producers who wish to use those resources have
to part with the full amount of the surplus profit. This monetary payment
is what Marx calls ground-rent. For Marx, therefore, ground-rent is the
economic form that the monopoly of private ownership of non-reproducible
resources takes in a capitalist economy, and its monetary worth is the surplus
profit. While Marx mainly discussed land rent in the context of agricultural
production, he was clear that his analysis applied to all cases where a private
monopoly of land ownership obtains. The clearest articulation of the idea
that rent is surplus profit and that it can be applied widely can be seen from
the following quotation.
     Whenever natural forces can be monopolized and give the indus-
     trialist who make use of them a surplus profit, whether a waterfall,
     a rich mine, fishing grounds or a well situated building site, the
     person indicated as the owner of these natural objects, by virtue
     of his title to a portion of the earth, seizes this surplus profit
     from the functioning capital in the form of rent. (Marx, 1993,
     Chapter 46, pp. 908)
   On the other hand, it also highlights the total irrationality of rent as an
income stream that derives from the private ownership of a ‘portion of the
earth’, something which should not be the domain of private property at all.
     From the standpoint of a higher socio-economic formation, the
     private property of particular individuals in the earth will appear
     just as absurd as the private property of one man in other men.
     Even an entire society, a nation, or all simultaneously existing
     societies taken together, are not the owners of the earth. They
     are simply its possessors, its beneficiaries, and have to bequeath
     it in an improved state to succeeding generations, as boni patres
     familias. (Marx, 1993, pp. 911).
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In section 2, I discuss
an example to build intuition and explain key ideas behind Marx’s theory
of ground-rent, both with exogenous and endogenous capital outlays. The
discussion of the example is followed by a presentation of Marx’s theory of
rent in more general terms in the next few sections. In section 3, I discuss
the set-up for the general analysis and define the technological conditions
of production. In section 4, I define ground-rent and derive explicit expres-
sions for its three components when capital outlays are exogenously given:

                                      4
DRI, DRII, AR. In section 5, I endogenize capital outlays using profit max-
imising behaviour of capitalists and show that, in such a situation, absolute
rent will be zero. In section 6, I close the model by determining the price
of corn by the interaction of demand and supply of the agricultural product.
The final section concludes the discussion.


2     Example
Before I present my argument in general terms, I would like to discuss an
example to build intuition. In this example, the agricultural economy is
composed of just two plots of land– plot 1 and plot 2 – and the agricultural
output is ‘corn’. The marginal product of capital outlay on each plot declines
linearly with the level of capital outlay, i.e. as more capital in invested on
a plot, the extra amount of output produced declines. This is an intuitively
appealing assumption because there is a fixed factor of production: land. As
more capital is invested on a given plot of land, output rises but only at a
declining rate. This is captured by the assumption that the marginal product
of investment, i.e. the increment of output with each dollar of investment,
declines as capital investment is increased.
    For this example, let us assume that the marginal product of capital on
plot 1 is given by 10 − 3k and on plot 2 by 5 − k, where k denotes capital
outlay. Note that, on both plots, the marginal product declines with capital
outlay. Suppose, finally, that total capital outlay on both plots of land is
2.75 dollars, the economy-wide average rate of profit is 25% and the price of
corn is 2 dollar per unit.
    Given this configuration of the agricultural economy, I would like to com-
pute the amount of ground-rent on both plots and then decompose total
ground-rent into its three components. I will first discuss a situation where
the level of capital outlay on both plots of land is given to be 2.75. In the fol-
lowing sub-section, I will discuss the situation when capitalist farmers choose
the level of capital outalys to maximize their profit income.

2.1    Exogenous Capital Outlay
Marginal output as a function of capital outlay is depicted for both plots of
land in Figure 1. Both graphs have a vertical, broken line at k = 2.75, which
is the total amount of capital outlay on each plot. This is exogenously given.


                                        5
The marginal product curves give us some useful information. For plot 1,
the curve starts at a value of 10 units of corn and then declines towards zero
as more capital is invested; for plot 2, the curve starts at 5 units of corn
and then, in a similar manner, declines towards zero. The curves intersect at
k = 2.5. For levels of capital outlay less than 2.5 dollars, plot 1 has higher
marginal product; for levels of capital outlay that is larger than 2.5 dollars,
plot 2 has higher marginal product.

2.1.1   Which Plot is More Fertile?
My first task is to identify the plot that is more fertile. This is necessary
because ground rent of the first variety (DRI) is related to differential fertility
of the plots, i.e. a part of the total ground-rent on relatively more fertile plots
can be identified as DRI (Marx, 1993, chapter 39). I will associate fertility
of a plot of land with the marginal product of investment on that plot. This
makes sense because a plot with higher marginal product of investment can
be intuitively understood to be more fertile. One immediate issue we face
here is that, as we see in Figure 1, the marginal product declines with the
level of capital investment. For instance if we chose to use the marginal
product at 1 dollar of capital outlay to define fertility, then plot 1 would be
deemed more fertile; if, instead, we chose the marginal product at 2.7 dollar
of capital outlay to define fertility, then plot 2 would be deemed more fertile.
Thus, fertility ranking would change as capital outlays change across plots
of land, rendering any analysis infeasible.
    To get around this problem and to define a stable fertility ranking among
plots of land, a ranking that does not change when the level of capital outlays
change, I will choose to define fertility with the marginal product at zero
capital outlay. This is the extra amount of output produced when capital
investment is just increased beyond zero. Intuitively, this definition takes
us close to what we can understand as the intrinsic fertility of a plot of
land. If this extra amount of output varies across plots, it must vary because
of the intrinsic qualities of the plots of land (impacted no doubt by past
investments). Hence, I will identify plots with higher marginal product at
zero capital outlay as more fertile than plots with lower marginal product at
zero capital outlay. Using this convention, we identify plot 1 as more fertile
than plot 2.




                                        6
                                           10
                                           8        F




                                                        Plot 1
        marginal output (units of corn)

                                           6




                                                    E              G
                                           4




                                                    D                              H
                                           2




                                                    C                              I
                                                                                               Plot 2
                                                    B   (1+r)/p                    J
                                                    A                              K
                                           0




                                                0         1            2               3         4      5

                                                                  capital advanced (dollars)



Figure 1: Marginal output of capital outlay on two plots of land with different
fertility when capital outlay is exogenously fixed at 2.75.


2.1.2                                     Total Ground-Rent
I will first find the total amount of ground-rent on the two plots of land.
According to Marx, total ground-rent is the surplus profit on a plot of land,
where surplus profit is the total output less the notional amount that would
have been earned if the capital earned the economy-wide average rate of
profit (Marx, 1993, chapter 37, 38). On plot 1, total output can be found by
adding up the marginal outputs associated with all capital outlays between
0 and 2.75. This is represented in Figure 1 by the area AKIF and is equal
to 16.16 units of corn. If the total capital invested on this plot had earned
the economy-wide average rate of profit of 25%, it would produce revenue


                                                                           7
of 2.75 ∗ (1 + 0.25) dollars. Since the price of each unit of corn is 2 dollars
per unit, this is equivalent to 1.72 units of corn. Hence, surplus profit on
plot 1 is equal to 14.44(= 16.16 − 1.72) units of corn. Since ground-rent is
quantitatively equal to surplus profit, we see that the total ground-rent on
plot 1 is 14.44 units of corn. Using a similar argument, we find that the total
ground-rent on plot 2 is 7.56 units of corn.

2.1.3   Absolute Rent
Total ground rent on plot 1 is represented in Figure 1 by the area BJIF , and
total ground-rent on plot 2 is represented in Figure 1 by the area BJHE.
We see immediately that the area BJIC is part of the total ground-rent
on both plots of land. Moreover, this area and the portion of ground-rent
that it represents, does not get impacted by the declining marginal products
of capital investments, once total capital outlay is fixed on the two plots of
land. This leads me to identify this part of total ground-rent as absolute rent
(AR). The reason for this is that the other two components of ground-rent,
DRI and DRII, depend, respectively, on fertility differentials and differences
of capital outlays - both of which will be impacted by the declining marginal
products (Marx, 1993, chapter 38, 39).
    At this point, let me highlight an important point. Notice that the height
of the rectangle BJIC is given by JI. This is equal to the difference between
KI and KJ. On the one hand, KI represents the marginal product of capital
on the plot in which it is lowest when total capital outlay is 2.75; on the other
hand, KJ represents the notional revenue, measured in units of corn, that
would be earned at the economy-wide average rate of profit for each dollar
invested. This is given by (1 + r)/p, where r is the economy-wide average
rate of profit and p is the price of a unit of corn, and can be thought of as the
opportunity cost of investing capital in agriculture. Hence, the amount of
absolute rent, being the area of the rectangle BJIC, depends crucially on the
difference between the lowest marginal product of capital outlay among the
plots of land and the notional revenue earned by each dollar of investment.
As this difference falls (rises), AR falls (rises). Using the numbers in Figure 1,
we get the magnitude of absolute rent, on both plot 1 and plot 2, as 3.09
units of corn.




                                        8
2.1.4   Differential Rent
Let us now turn to plot 1 and compute the two components of differential
rent. To compute differential rent of the first variety on plot 1, DRI1 , we
need to quantify the difference in the fertility levels of the two plots. Using
Figure 1, we see that one way to capture this difference is by the length of the
segment EF . This is the difference in the marginal product at zero capital
outlay between plot 1 (more fertile) and plot 2 (less fertile). To use this
difference in the marginal product at zero capital outlay to compute DRI on
plot 1, note that, starting with with a value of 10, as the magnitude of capital
outlay rises on plot 1, its marginal product declines. When capital outlay is
1.67, the marginal product equals 5, which is exactly equal to the marginal
product on plot 2 at zero capital outlay. This is represented in Figure 1 by
the point G.
    Since differential rent of the first variety arises from fertility differentials,
I define DRI on plot 1 as being represented by the area EGF in Figure 1.
This is the extra amount of rent earned on plot 1 due to the higher fertility
on that plot in comparison to plot 2. Using the numbers in Figure 1, we get
DRI on plot 1 as 4.17 units of corn. This allows us to now compute DRII
on plot 1 as total ground-rent less the sum of AR and DRI. Hence, DRII
on plot 1 is 7.18(= 14.44 − 4.17 − 3.09). On Figure 1, DRII for plot 1 is
represented by the area CIGE.
    We can compute the components of differential rent on plot 2 in an anal-
ogous manner. To start with, note that, by definition, differential rent of
the first variety on plot 2, DRI2 , is zero. This is because plot 2 has lower
fertility than plot 1 and cannot have DRI. In fact, plot 2 has been used as
the reference to compute DRI on plot 1. Thus, there cannot be any DRI on
plot 2. Since we have already computed total ground rent and absolute rent
on plot 2, we can get DRII as the difference between them. Hence, DRII on
plot 2 is 4.47(= 7.56 − 3.09) units of corn.
    Let me now summarize what I have found. The total ground-rent on plot 1
and plot 2 are 14.44 and 7.56 units of corn, respectively. The components
of ground-rent on plot 1 are: DRI1 = 4.17, DRII1 = 7.18, AR1 = 3.09;
the components of ground-rent on plot 2 are: DRI2 = 0, DRII2 = 4.47,
AR2 = 3.09.




                                         9
2.2       Capital Outlay Endogenized
I will now discuss the determination and decomposition of ground-rent when
capital outlay is endogenized. Let me start with plot 1 and ask how much
capital outlay would a profit-maximizing capitalist farmer choose to invest?
The answer is straightforward. The capitalist farmer will choose a level of
capital outlay that will maximize her profit. This implies that the chosen
level of capital outlay will be such that the marginal product of capital is
exactly equal to (1 + r)/p.1 If she were to choose a level of capital outlay
that is lower than than this level, then the marginal product of capital would
be higher than (1 + r)/p. By increasing capital outlay by a small magnitude,
the capitalist farmer would be able to increase her profit income. On the
other hand, if the chosen capital outlay was higher than this level, then
the marginal product of capital would be lower than (1 + r)/p, so that the
capitalist could reduce her loss by reducing her capital outlay. The only point
where there would be no incentive for the capitalist to change her level of
capital outlay would be the level at which the marginal product of capital is
exactly equal to (1 + r)/p.
    Using this logic, we can see from Figure 2 that the profit-maximizing level
of capital outlay on plot 1 would be represented by the point H. At this level
of capital outlay, the marginal product of capital is exactly equal to (1+r)/p.
Using the numbers for the example, we find that this level of capital outlay
is 3.125 dollars. Using the same logic as above, we can see that the profit-
maximizing level of capital outlay on plot 2 will be represented in Figure 2
by the point I. Using the numbers for the example, this profit-maximizing
level of capital outlay on plot 2 is 4.375 dollars.
    Let us now compute the total ground-rent on the two plots. On plot 1,
this is represented by the area BHF in Figure 2. Using the numbers for the
example, total ground-rent on plot 1, when capital outlays is endogenous, is
given by 14.65 units of corn. On plot 2, total ground-rent is represented by
the area BIE in Figure 2. Using the numbers for the example, total ground-
rent on plot 2, when capital outlays is endogenous, is therefore given by 9.57
units of corn.
    What is the magnitude of AR? Recall that the magnitude of AR depends
on the difference between the marginal product of capital on the plot where
it has the lowest value at its level of capital outlay and the opportunity cost
of investing in agriculture. When profit-maximizing capitalist farmers choose
  1
      Recall that (1 + r)/p is the opportunity cost of investing capital in agriculture.


                                              10
                                        10
                                        8        F




                                                     Plot 1
      marginal output (units of corn)

                                        6




                                                 E              G
                                        4
                                        2




                                                                                            Plot 2
                                                 B   (1+r)/p                          H              I
                                                 A
                                        0




                                             0         1            2             3           4          5

                                                               capital advanced (dollars)



Figure 2: Marginal output of capital outlay on two plots of land with different
fertility when capital outlay is chosen by capitalist farmers to maximize profit
income.


the level of capital outlay to maximize their profit income, it necessarily leads
to equality of the marginal product of capital on each plot of land and the
opportunity cost of investing in agriculture. Hence, the difference between
the marginal product of capital and the opportunity cost of investing in
agriculture is zero on each plot. This implies that the magnitude of AR is
zero.
    What is the magnitude of DRI and DRII on plot 1? From Figure 2, we
see that DRI on plot 1 is exactly the same as in Figure 1. Hence, DRI on
plot 1 is 4.17 units of corn. Since total ground-rent on plot 1 is 14.65, this
immediately tells us that DRII on plot 1 is 10.48(= 14.65 − 4.17) units of

                                                                        11
corn. In Figure 2, DRI and DRII on plot 1 are represented by the areas
EGF and BHGE, respectively. What is the magnitude of DRI and DRII on
plot 2? Just like before, DRI on plot 2 is zero because it is the less fertile plot
among the two plots that comprise the agricultural economy in this example
economy. Hence, total ground-rent on plot 2 is exactly equal to DRII. Thus,
DRII on plot 2 is 9.75 units of corn (the total ground-rent on plot 2). In
Figure 2, DRII (as also total ground-rent) on plot 2 is represented by the
areas BIE.
    Let me now summarize my findings. When capitalist farmers choose the
level of capital outlay to maximize profit income, the total ground-rent on
plot 1 and 2 are 14.65 and 9.57 units of corn, respectively. The components
of ground-rent on plot 1 are: DRI1 = 4.17, DRII1 = 10.48, AR1 = 0;
the components of ground-rent on plot 2 are: DRI2 = 0, DRII2 = 9.57,
AR2 = 0. In the next subsections, I present this same argument in more
general terms.


3     Conditions of Production
3.1    The Set-Up
I conceive of the economy as being composed of an industrial sector and
an agricultural sector. The industrial sector is composed of I industries,
each producing a single product with a given technique of production. The
agricultural sector produces a homogenous output, called ‘corn’, using land,
labour, and inputs from industry. I work with the implicit assumption that
corn is a non-basic product in the following precise sense: corn is not used as
a direct means of production in any industrial production process. In such
a scenario, the prices of industrial products are determined independently
of the conditions of agricultural production. In technical terms, this means
that the industrial sector forms a decomposable system of equation - which
determines the prices of the industrial products and the average rate of profit
(Kurz, 1978, pp. 27). Hence, for the analysis of rent, in this paper, I take the
prices of industrial products, the wage rate and the economy-wide average
rate of profit, as exogenously given.
    In agriculture, following Marx (as stated in the quotation below), I as-
sume that there are three classes: capitalists, workers and landlords. All
the agricultural land is owned by the class of landlords. Capitalist orga-


                                        12
nize production of corn by leasing in land from landlords and purchasing the
labour-power of workers. The lease contract between capitalists and land-
lords specifies a fixed period of time - one production cycle - for which the
latter hands over the right to use the relevant plot of land to the capitalist in
return for a monetary payment known as ground-rent. The labour contract
between capitalists and workers specifies a fixed period of time - one pro-
duction cycle - for which the latter gives up the use of her labour-power to
the capitalist for a monetary payment known as the wage. After production
is completed, the capitalist sells the corn on the open market to recoup the
wage and rent payments she made earlier and, in addition, make a profit
income.

      The presuppositions for the capitalist mode of production [in
      agriculture] are thus as follows: the actual cultivators are wage-
      labourers, employed by a capitalist, the farmer, who pursues agri-
      culture simply as a particular field of exploitation of capital, as an
      investment of his capital in a particular sphere of production. At
      certain specified dates, e.g. annually, this capitalist-farmer pays
      the landowner, the proprietor of the land he exploits, a contrac-
      tually fixed sum of money ... for the permission to employ his
      capital in this particular field of production. This sum of money
      is known as ground-rent, irrespective of whether it is paid for
      agricultural land, building land, mines, fisheries, forests, etc. It
      is paid for the entire period for which the landowner has contrac-
      tually rented the land to the farmer. Marx (1993, pp. 755-756).

3.2    Technology of Production
Suppose the total available land used in agricultural production is divided
into N plots and is indexed by the numbers i = 1, 2, . . . , N . Let a subset
of these plots, indexed by i = 1, 2, . . . , n, be currently in use for agricultural
production. An important point worth highlighting upfront is that n is a
function of the price of corn, p, i.e. n = n(p). The reason for this is easy to
see. As the price of corn rises, some of the previously unused plots of land
are brought under cultivation because they can now generate ‘surplus profit’
and hence provide ground-rent. Since plots of land will not be leased out by
landlords unless they receive positive amount of ground-rent, the number of
plots that will be used for agricultural cultivation will itself depend on the

                                        13
price of the agricultural commodity. Thus, the plots of land that are in use
are indexed by i = 1, 2, . . . , n(p), where the index of the last plot, n(p) is a
function of p, the price of the agricultural commodity.
    On the i-th plot of land that is in use, let total capital outlay by the
capitalist producer of corn be denoted by ki = ci + vi , where ci and vi
are constant and variable capital respectively, measured in monetary units.
Here ci refers to the sum of money used by the capitalist to purchase non-
labour inputs into production, and vi refers to the sum of money used to
purchase labour-power (for one production cycle). In examples that he works
with, Marx explicitly specifies the relationship between capital outlay and the
volume of output on each plot of land. For instance, each row in Table I, II
and III in Marx (1993, Chapter 39, pp. 791, 794–95) specifies the quantitative
relationship between capital outlay and output.
    I express Marx’s numerical examples in a general algebraic form and
capture the relationship between total capital outlays and the quantity of
output on the i-th plot with the function, fi (.). I would like to point out
that what I am using is not a standard production function. In my case,
following Marx, the monetary value of inputs, and not their real magnitudes,
enter into the function, fi (.), as inputs. To distinguish my analysis from the
standard case, where the arguments of the function are real quantities of
inputs, I therefore call fi (.) a pseudo-production function.
    I will assume that the collection of pseudo-production functions have
standard concavity properties and note this explicitly.
Assumption 1. Output on each plot of land is zero if capital outlay is zero,
i.e. fi (0) = 0, for all i = 1, 2, . . . , n(p). The quantity of output increases
with the magnitude of capital outlay, i.e. fi0 (k) > 0 for k ≥ 0; the marginal
product of capital outlay is always nonnegative and finite, i.e. 0 ≤ fi0 (k) < ∞
for k ≥ 0; and, the marginal product diminishes with the magnitude of capital
outlay, i.e. fi00 (k) < 0 for k ≥ 0.
    Assumption 1 is inspired by classical economics (Pasinetti, 1977, Chap-
ter 1, Section 3). It has three components. First, agricultural output cannot
be produced without capital outlay to purchase inputs and labour-power.
This is easy to justify because production cannot take place without inputs
and without labour. Second, the marginal product of capital outlay, i.e.
the extra amount of output produced when capital outlay is increased by a
small magnitude, is positive. This means that from any given level of capital
outlay, when capital outlay is increased by a small magnitude, there is an

                                       14
increase in the amount of output produced. For instance, if capital outlay
increases from 1 dollars to 1.1 dollars, agricultural output increases by a pos-
itive amount. Third, the marginal product of capital outlay is a declining
function of capital outlay. This means that as capital outlay is increased
from any level, the increment in output associated with a small increase in
capital outlay itself decreases with the level of capital outlay. For instance,
the increment in output associated with capital outlay increasing from 2 dol-
lars to 2.1 dollars is smaller than the increment in output associated with
capital outlay increasing from 1 dollars to 1.1 dollars.
    The third assumption is crucial and can be justified as follows. Land
cannot be produced by labour. Thus, the amount of land in each plot (or
parcel) is fixed, i.e. it cannot be increased with the use of labour. To capture
this we can say that land is a non-reproducible resource. Since the amount of
land on any plot of land is fixed, as more capital is invested on it, the output
increases but only at a declining rate - as captured in Figure 3.2 The key
point is that the non-reproducible nature of land imparts to it the property
of diminishing marginal product of capital outlay.

3.3     Worst-Quality Plot
A characteristic feature of agricultural production is that the plots of land
are of unequal ‘quality’ (which we measure with the marginal productivity
of capital); some plots are more fertile, or have better location, than others
(Marx, 1993, pp. 789). While it is true that plots of land are of different
quality, we cannot rank order them by productivity without taking account
of the amount of capital outlay in each plot, as has been stressed by Sraffian
scholars (Kurz, 1978).3 Why is this the case? Because the area of each
plot of land is fixed and the pseudo-production functions are concave by
Assumption 1, the marginal product of capital outlay can vary across plots
of land because of different amounts of capital outlay across plots. Since we
use the marginal product of capital as the measure of land productivity (or its
quality), there can be rank ordering reversals when capital outlays is allowed
to vary across plots of land. This is highlighted in Figure 4, where we can see
that the marginal product curves for the i-th and j-th plots cross over. For
   2
    For a similar assumption see Figure 1.4 in Pasinetti (1977, Chapter 1, Section 3).
   3
    One of the errors in Ricardo’s analysis of rent was the assumption that plots of land
could be ordered according to fertility without taking account of capital investment. Marx
had inherited the same error from Ricardo. (Kurz, 1978, pp. 21)


                                           15
              fi(k), f’i(k)




                                            fi(k)




                                            f’i(k)




                                                          k
                  O



Figure 3: This figure depicts the pseudo-production function on th i-th plot
of land that is in use for agricultural production. The curve fi (k) denotes
the output, and fi0 (k) denotes the marginal product, both as a function of the
amount of capital outlay, k.


low levels of capital outlay, the j-th plot has higher marginal product, and
hence, is more ‘productive’; at higher levels of capital outlays, the ordering
is reversed and the i-th plot has a higher marginal product, and hence, is
more ‘productive’. This demonstrates that one cannot order plots of land
according to quality without taking account of capital outlays.
    In this paper, I will adopt the convention of rank ordering plots of land
by the marginal product of the very ‘first’ unit of capital outlay. The intu-
ition for this is that the marginal product of capital at zero capital outlay
on any plot of land comes closest to capturing the notion of its ‘intrinsic’
productivity at any point in time. Considering a continuum of changes in
capital outlay, it gives us the amount of increase in output (of corn) when
capital outlay is increased from zero to a small positive amount. It is worth
highlighting that this convention for ordering plots of land is also able to
capture any productivity that derives from past capital outlays on fixed cap-


                                      16
ital, like irrigation, etc. that is now part of the plot of land. This is because
the marginal product of capital at zero capital outlay can be allowed to be
implicitly determined by past improvements made on the plot of land.4 That
is why I have put the word intrinsic in quotation in the second sentence of
this paragraph.



               f’i(k), f’j(k)



                                f’j(k)




                                                  f’i(k)




                                                                  k
                   O                        kj*            ki *



Figure 4: This figure depicts the marginal product of capital outlay on the
i-th plot (solid line) and j-th plot (dashed line) of land. Note how there is a
reversal of marginal productivity ranking of the two plots when we move from
low to high capital outlays.

    Using this idea, I will order plots i and j according to intrinsic quality as
follows: I will say that plot i is of higher quality than plot j if fi0 (0) > fj0 (0),
i.e. if the marginal product of capital at zero capital outlay is higher on
plot i than on plot j. Since there are a finite number of plots, we can always
arrange them in diminishing order of quality, as we have defined it here (with
strict inequalities). Once we do so, we can renumber the plots and call plot 1
the most fertile, plot 2 the next most fertile, and so on. I state this as the
  4
    Previous investment in land improvement would shift the whole marginal product
curve upwards.


                                         17
assumption about the ordering of the intrinsic quality of plots of land.
                                           0
Assumption 2. f10 (0) > f20 (0) > · · · > fn−1 (0) > fn0 (0), where n = n(p) and
p is the price of the agricultural commodity.

    In the rest of the paper, the analysis of ground-rent will proceed in three
steps. In the first step, I will derive expressions for ground-rent and its three
components, DRI, DRII and AR, taking the capital outlays on each plot
of land, ki , the price of corn, p, and the economy-wide average rate of profit,
r, as exogenously given. In the second step, I will endogenize the capital
outlay, ki , by positing profit-maximising behaviour of capitalist farmers. In
the third, and final, step, I will close the model by endogenizing the price of
corn, p, by allowing the interaction of demand and supply of corn to clear
the market for corn. The economy-wide average rate of profit, r, will remain
exogenous throughout the analysis.


4     Ground-Rent With Exogenous Capital Out-
      lays
Taking the capital outlays on each plot of land, ki , the price of corn, p, and
the economy-wide rate of profit, r, as exogenously given, I would like to
determine the magnitude of ground-rent on each plot of land and decompose
it into DRI, DRII and AR.

4.1     Total Ground-Rent
Since the price of corn is given by p, and the economy-wide rate of profit is
denoted by r, I can define what Marx calls the ‘surplus profit’ on the i-th
plot of land as pfi (ki ) − (1 + r)ki , where pfi (ki ) is the revenue actually earned
and (1 + r)ki is the counterfactual revenue that would have been earned if the
total capital outlay, ki , had earned the economy-wide average rate of profit.
The key insight of Marx’ analysis of rent is that private ownership of land by
the class of landlords - which he refers to as the monopoly of landed property
- allows them to appropriate the surplus profit as ground-rent (Marx, 1993,
Chapter 37).
    Implementing the definition of ground-rent in my model, I see that its



                                         18
magnitude on the i-th plot of land, measured in units of corn, is given by

                             (1 + r)ki Z ki 0         (1 + r)ki
            GRi = fi (ki ) −          =    fi (k)dk −           .            (1)
                                 p      0                 p

Since fi (ki ) is the total output on the i-th plot with capital outlay, ki , and
(1 + r)(ki /p) is revenue that would have been earned, in real terms, on the
same capital employed elsewhere in the economy (since the economy-wide
average rate of profit is r), the surplus profitR is given by the difference be-
tween the two. Using the fact that fi (ki ) = 0ki fi0 (k)dk, which follows from
assumption 1, and especially that fi (0) = 0, we then get the expression in
(1).



                f’i(k)



                                              OG = AH = (1+r)/p
                D
                                              OE = HC = f’i(ki)




                         Total Ground Rent
                E                                       C

                G                                       A
                                                        H
                                                                  k
                 O                                     ki



Figure 5: Ground rent in agriculture on the i-th plot of land measured in
units of corn. The horizontal axis measures total capital outlay; the vertical
axis measures the marginal output as a function of capital outlay, fi0 (k). The
price of corn is p and the economy-wide rate of profit is r. Total ground rent
on the i-th plot of land is given by the area DCAG.

    We can use Figure 5 to build some intuition about ground-rent. In this
figure, I have plotted the marginal product of capital outlay, fi0 (k), on the

                                             19
vertical axis against the amount of capital outlay, k, on the horizontal axis.
The total amount of capital outlay on this plot of land is given by ki . Hence,
total output of corn is given by the area under the marginal product curve,
i.e. DCHO, which is the first term in (1). The area GAHO represents
the amount of corn that would be needed to ensure the economywide rate
of profit, r, on the total capital outlay, ki . This is the second term in (1).
Hence, the total ground-rent on the i-th plot of land is represented by the
area DCAG.
    In writing the expression for total ground-rent in (1) and in constructing
the corresponding visual representation in figure 5, I have implicitly assumed
that fi0 (ki ) > (1 + r)/p for i = 1, 2, . . . , n. This assumption means that on
each plot of land that is in use, the marginal product of capital outlay, fi0 (ki ),
is greater than the opportunity cost of investing capital elsewhere in the
economy, (1 + r)/p. This is a crucial assumption for the analysis of absolute
rent and I will come back to it several times in the rest of the paper.

4.2    Marginal-Capital Plot
I would now like to decompose the magnitude of total rent given in (1) into
two components: differential rent and absolute rent. To do so, I need to
identify the ‘marginal’ unit of capital outlay, which is defined as the unit of
capital outlay that is least productive, and then use this benchmark to define
differential rent. Note that each plot of land has diminishing marginal pro-
ductivity of capital outlay by Assumption 1. Hence, to identify the marginal
capital, I just need to find the minimum of the marginal product on each
plot of land at their given capital outlay levels. Recall that the amount of
capital outlay on the i-th plot of land is given by ki . Hence, I can define the
output associated with the marginal unit of capital as

                        y m ≡ y m (p) =        min           fi0 (ki ),         (2)
                                          i∈{1,2,...,n(p)}


where y m is the marginal output associated with the least productive unit of
capital outlay used among all plots of land. Note that y m is a function of p,
the price of the agricultural commodity, because it is the minimum of fi0 (ki )
where i ranges over {1, 2, . . . , n(p)}. Since n = n(p) is a function of p, y m is
also a function of p. To make this explicit, we have specified y m = y m (p).
    Let us identify this plot of land with the index m, where 1 ≤ m ≤ n(p),
and call it the marginal-capital plot of land. Thus, the m-th plot of land

                                          20
has the lowest marginal product of capital outlay for the last unit of capital,
              0
i.e. y m = fm   (km ), among all the plots of land that are currently under
cultivation. Note that, in general, m 6= n(p), i.e. the worst plot of land in
terms of quality that has been identified in assumption 2 is not, in general,
the plot of land with the ‘marginal’ unit of capital outlay.

4.3    Differential and Absolute Rent
Now that I have identified the minimum marginal product of capital, I can
decompose total rent as,
                             GRi = DRi + ARi ,                             (3)
where the first component on the right hand side in (3) is total differential
rent,                         Z       ki
                      DRi (p) =            [fi0 (k) − y m (p)] dk,         (4)
                                  0
and the second component on the right hand side in (3) is absolute rent,
                                      "                       #
                                           (1 + r)
                                            m
                      ARi (p) = ki y (p) −         .                       (5)
                                              p
An important point to keep in mind is that both DRi and ARi are functions
of p, the price of the agricultural commodity, and r, the economy-wide rate
of profit. This is easy to see from (3) and (5).
    To build intuition about the definitions of differential and absolute, we
can turn to Figure 6. Total ground rent is represented by area DCAG.
Differential rent is represented by the area DCBF (which is a representa-
tion of (4), and absolute rent is represented by the area F BAG (which is a
representation of (5).
    The area DCBF is called differential rent because it represents the addi-
tion of all the extra output produced on any plot of land over and above the
benchmark level, y m (the minimum marginal product), i.e. sum of fi0 (k)−y m
over all units of capital. This sum depends on productivity differences across
plots of land arising both from its intrinsic productivity and from differences
in magnitudes of capital outlay - the two together determine the marginal
product of capital curve for any plot of land.
    I define the difference between the total ground-rent (the area DCAG)
and the total differential rent (the area DCBF ) as absolute rent. Alge-
braically, this is given by (5) and visually this is represented by the area

                                            21
                f’i(k)

                                OG = AH = (1+r)/p
                                OF = HB = ym = mini f’i(ki)
               D                OE = HC = f’i(ki)



                         DR

               E                                   C
               F                                   B
                         AR
               G                                   A
                                                   H
                                                              k
                   O                              ki



Figure 6: Ground rent in agriculture on the i-th plot of land measured in
units of corn. The horizontal axis measures total capital outlay; the vertical
axis measures the marginal output as a function of capital outlay, fi0 (k). The
price of corn is p and the economy-wide rate of profit is r. Total ground
rent on the i-th plot of land is given by the area DCAG, differential rent by
DCBF and absolute rent by F BAG.


F BAG. I call this absolute rent because it is what remains after I have
removed total differential rent from total ground-rent. By definition, it does
not depend on differences of productivity across plots of land.
   Let us think a little more about the definition of absolute rent. From (5),
we see that the absolute rent is the product of two terms: (a) the level of
capital outlay, ki , and (b) the difference between y m and (1 + r)/p. We know
that y m is the minimum marginal product of capital across all plots of land
and (1 + r)/p is what a unit of capital could earn, in real terms, if it were
invested outside agriculture. Thus, for the existence of absolute rent, it is
necessary that y m > (1 + r)/p.
   Since there is large disagreement in the extant literature about absolute
rent, let me discuss it in some more detail. Marx had conceived of absolute


                                       22
rent as the total rent earned on a new plot of land that is brought under cul-
tivation to satisfy rising demand for corn (Marx, 1993, Chapter 45). Implicit
in Marx’s analysis is the idea that the new land brought under cultivation
is also the least fertile plot of land, a fact that has been emphasized by
Fine (1979). In the extant literature, there are two interpretations for the
existence of absolute rent.
    According to one interpretation, the source of absolute rent is the rela-
tively lower organic composition of capital in agriculture compared to the
rest of the economy. Fine (1979, pp. 263) has an algebraic expression to
capture this idea. Following this claim, if the organic composition of capital
rises in the rest of the economy even as the organic composition of capital
in agriculture remains unchanged, there should be an increase in absolute
rent, as Marx (1993) claimed and Fine (1979) emphasized. In my model,
this effect is easy to capture. The relative rise in the organic composition of
capital in the rest of the economy ceteris paribus leads to a fall in the uniform
rate of profit, r. From the expression in (5), we can see that this will lead to
a rise in absolute rent if y m and p does not change.
    Another interpretation of Marx’s texts point out that the source of abso-
lute rent is the ‘monopoly power’ of the class of landlords (Ramirez, 2009).
The class of landlords exercise their monopoly of ownership of land by with-
holding land from the lease market unless they are assured absolute rent.5
The mechanism for this is straightforward. By withholding land from the
lease market, landlords can reduce the supply of corn and thereby ensure
that the price of corn rises. The rise in the price of corn can then allow them
to bargain for higher ground-rent, the extra being understood as absolute
rent. In my model, this is easy to capture. From the expression in (5), we
can see that if the price of corn rises ceteris paribus then (1 + r)/p will fall,
and this will lead to a rise in absolute rent.
    I would like to point out at this point that the model I have proposed in
this paper is more general than existing work on Marx’s rent theory. This is
because my model can accommodate both interpretations for the existence of
absolute rent that have been previously offered by Marxist scholars, the low
organic composition explanation and the monopoly power explanation. What
both interpretations seem to have missed is that the existence of absolute rent
depends crucially on the gap between the minimum marginal product, y m ,
and the opportunity cost of capital outlay, (1+r)/p. As long as y m > (1+r)/p
  5
      I will explore another channel for the exercise of landlord power in the next section.


                                              23
there will be positive absolute rent; if y m = (1+r)/p there will be no absolute
rent, no matter if agriculture has a lower organic composition of capital
or if the class of landlords have monopoly power. This is precisely where
the implicit assumption that fi0 (ki ) > (1 + r)/p becomes important. Since
fi0 (ki ) > (1 + r)/p for i = 1, 2, . . . , n, this implies that the minimum of fi0 (ki ),
i.e. y m , is also larger than (1 + r)/p. Hence, y m > (1 + r)/p. This ensures
that there is positive absolute rent on each plot of land.

4.4     Differential Rent I and II
The second step of the decomposition is to break up total differential rent
in (4) into differential rent of the first variety, DRI, and differential rent of
the second variety, DRII. To do so, I will use the least productive plot,
indexed by n according to assumption 2, as the benchmark to define DRIi .
To implement this decomposition let us define a level of capital outlay on the
i-th plot of land, ki∗ , such that the marginal product of capital outlay on the
i-th plot of land at this level of capital outlay is exactly equal to the marginal
                                                                           0
product of capital on the least productive plot at zero capital outlay, fn(p) (0),
i.e.
                                 fi0 (ki∗ ) = fn(p)
                                               0
                                                    (0).                       (6)
Assumption 1 and 2 guarantees that a positive value of ki∗ (p) always exists
(as long as all plots in use have positive capital outlays). With this definition
of ki∗ (p), I can define differential rent of the first variety as,
                                   Z k∗ (p)
                                        i
                    DRIi (p) =                fi0 (k)dk − ki∗ (p) fn(p)
                                                                   0
                                                                        (0)
                                    0
                                   Z k∗ (p) h
                                        i
                                                                 i
                               =               fi0 (k) − fn(p)
                                                          0
                                                               (0) dk.                (7)
                                    0

Note that assumption 2 ensures that DRIi (p) is positive. If one weakens
assumption 2 and uses weak inequalities, then one will be ensured a nonneg-
ative DRIi (p). Thus, we will always have DRIi (p) ≥ 0.
    What is the intuition for the definition of DRIi (p)? Using the worst-
quality plot of land as the benchmark, the definition is identifying all units
of capital outlay on any plot of land that have higher marginal product, i.e.
productivity, than the ‘intrinsic’ quality of the worst-quality plot (marginal
product of capital of the least productive plot of land at zero capital outlay).
When we add up all the additional output produced by the units of capital

                                                24
so identified, we get differential rent of the first variety, DRIi (p), as defined
in (7). Thus, this definition captures Marx’s intuition that differential rent of
the first variety arises due to differences in the quality (or fertility) of plots of
land - the extensive margin of David Ricardo - with respect to a benchmark
plot of land (the least productive plot). Using Figure 7, this definition would
translate into identifying differential rent of first variety, DRIi (p), as the
area DIJ.
    I can now define the second component of differential rent as the difference
of total differential rent and differential rent of the first variety, i.e.
                              Z ki
               DRIIi (p) =           [fi0 (k) − y m (p)] dk − DRIi (p) .         (8)
                               0

Using Figure 7, differential rent of second variety would be identified with the
area IJCBF , which is the difference in total differential rent, DCBF , and
                                                                            0
differential rent of the first variety, DIJ. Since y m (p) ≤ fi0 (ki ) < fn(p)  (0),
where the last (strict) inequality is true if ki > 0 for all plots, we can see that
the area IJCBF will always be nonnegative. Hence, DRIIi (p) ≥ 0.
    What is the intuition for DRIIi (p)? We have seen earlier that total differ-
ential rent DRi (p), defined in (4), arises from a combination of productivity
differences that come from differences in quality of plots of land and differ-
ences in the magnitude of capital outlay. We have also seen that DRIi (p),
defined in (7), arises from differences in quality of a plot with respect to
the benchmark worst-quality plot of land. When we remove DRIi (p) from
DRi (p), we are left with the component of differential rent that arises due
to differences in magnitude of capital outlay. Hence, DRIIi (p), as defined
in (8), captures Marx’s intuition that differential rent of the second vari-
ety arises from differences in the magnitude of capital outlay - the intensive
margin of David Ricardo.
    I can now bring together the above discussion to see that Marx’s ideas
about ground-rent, including his claim about its decomposition into three
parts, can be established. Defining total ground-rent as the transformation
of surplus profit, I have shown that it can be decomposed on any plot of land
into differential rent of first variety, differential rent of second variety, and
absolute rent, i.e.
                  GRi (p) = DRIi (p) + DRIIi (p) + ARi (p) ,
where GRi (p) is defined in (1), DRIi (p) is defined in (7), DRIIi (p) is defined
in (8), and ARi (p) is defined in (5). It is important to note that not only

                                           25
                f’i(k)
                                  OD = f’i(0)
                                  OI =KJ = f’n(0)
                                  OE = HC = f’i(ki)
               D                  OF = HB = ym = mini fi’(ki)
                                  OG = HA = (1+r)/p

                         DRI
               I                             J


               E         DRII                      C
               F         AR                        B
               G                                   A
                                         K         H
                                                                k
                   O                      k i*    ki



Figure 7: Ground rent in agriculture on the i-th plot of land measured in
units of corn. The horizontal axis measures total capital outlay; the vertical
axis measures the marginal output as a function of capital outlay, fi0 (k). The
price of corn is p and the economy-wide rate of profit is r. Total ground
rent on the i-th plot of land is given by the area DCAG, differential rent by
DCBF and absolute rent by F BAG. DRIi is given by DJI, and DRIIi by
IJCBF .


the total ground-rent, but each component of ground-rent as well, depends
on the price of the agricultural commodity, p.

4.5    Two Special Plots of Land
The analysis of rent presented above uses two special plots of land as refer-
ence plots, the m-th plot (the worst capital plot), and the n-th plot of land
(the worst quality plot of land, according to the convention captured in As-
sumption 2). What can we say about the components of rent on these two
reference plots of land?
                                      0
    On the worst capital plot, y m = fm (km ), i.e. y m is the marginal product
on the worst capital plot. The decomposition of total rent on the worst capital

                                       26
plot is depicted in Figure 8. There is no qualitative difference between the m-
th plot and any other plot of land. Much like on any other plot, total rent on
the m-th plot is also the sum of DRI, DRII and AR. A more interesting case
is presented by the worst quality plot, i.e. the plot indexed with n = n(p).
    On the worst quality plot, which is depicted in Figure 9, the graph of the
marginal product curve starts at fn0 (0). From (6), we see that for the n-th
plot, kn∗ = 0. This implies, using the expression in (7), that DRIn = 0. By
the concavity of the pseudo-production function, we have fn00 (.) < 0. Hence
DRIIn > 0, which is given by the area DCBF in Figure 9. We also know
that y m > (1 + r)/p, which implies that ARn > 0 (depicted as the area
F BAG in Figure 9). Thus, on the worst quality plot, total rent is composed
of DRII and AR; there is no DRI. This is an important conclusion and is
worth commenting on. Marx thought that total rent on the worst quality
plot of land could be identified with absolute rent, i.e. there would be no
differential rent on the worst quality plot (Marx, 1993, Chapter 45). My
analysis shows that that is not correct. On the worst quality plot of land,
total rent is composed of both AR and DRII. Since DRII arises from the
concavity of the pseudo-production function, i.e. the diminishing marginal
product of capital outlay, Marx’s conclusion seems to derive from his ignoring
this latter factor when analyzing rent on the worst quality plot of land.
    There is a deeper problem in the analysis presented so far. I have com-
pletely ignored the decision making process of the capitalist farmers. In
more concrete terms, by assuming a given amount of capital outlay on each
plot of land, I have ignored the process and implications of the behaviour of
capitalist farmers. This is a serious shortcoming because, once we allow a
reasonable behaviour of capitalist farmers, there will be a serious implication
for the analysis of rent. But before I turn to that, let me use an example to
illustrate my model.


5    Ground-Rent With Endogenous Capital Out-
     lays
Thus far, the analysis of ground-rent has treated the amount of capital out-
lays on each plot of land as exogenously given. I would now like to endogenize
capital outlay by asking: how much capital would be advanced on any plot
of land? I provide a simple answer. On each plot of land, capitalist produc-


                                      27
                 f’m(k)


                                              OG = AH = (1+r)/p
                D                             OE = HC = f’m(km)
                                              OI = f’n(0)
                          DRI
                I                        J

                          DRII

                E                                    C
                          AR
                G                                    A
                                                     H
                                                                  k
                    O                   k*m         km



Figure 8: Ground rent in agriculture on the m-th plot (i.e. worst capital plot)
of land measured in units of corn.


ers will choose the amount of capital outlay that will maximize the surplus
profit they can earn vis-a-vis what they can earn if they were to employ
their capital elsewhere in the economy. The competitive process in capitalist
economies will force capitalist farmers to choose this level of capital outlay.
Let us understand why and then see what this implies for absolute rent.

5.1    There is No Absolute Rent
Since the economy-wide rate of profit is exogenously given to be r, capitalist
producers can always earn the total revenue of (1 + r)ki by employing their
capital, ki , elsewhere in the economy. If, on the other hand, they choose to
employ the capital in agricultural production on the i-th plot of land, then
they can expect to earn total revenue of pfi (ki ), if the price of the agricultural
commodity is p. If total rent is a lump-sum monetary payment given by
GRi , then the amount of revenue they can expect to earn by employing
their capital in agriculture is pfi (ki ) − GRi . Hence, the extra revenue a
capitalist farmer can earn by investing her capital in agriculture is given by

                                        28
                 f’n(k)

                                       OG = AH = (1+r)/p
                                       OF = HB = ym = mini f’i(ki)
                D                      OE = HC = f’n(kn)
                                       OD = f’n(0)



                          DRII

                E                                        C
                F                                        B
                          AR
                G                                        A
                                                         H
                                                                     k
                  O                                      kn



Figure 9: Ground rent in agriculture on the n-th plot (i.e. worst quality plot)
of land measured in units of corn. Note that DRI is zero.

pfi (ki ) − GRi − (1 + r)ki . I posit that capitalist producers choose the level
of capital outlay, ki , on the i-th plot to maximize this surplus, i.e. her choice
problem on the i-th plot of land can be represented as follows:

                          max pfi (ki ) − GRi − (1 + r)ki .
                           ki

The first order condition of this maximisation problem gives us the optimal
choice of capital outlay as ki∗ , where,
                                                 1+r
                                  fi0 (ki∗ ) =       .                          (9)
                                                  p
This condition means that on the i-th plot of land, the amount of capital
outlay that will be chosen by profit-maximising capitalist farmers will be such
that the marginal product of capital outlay will be equalized to (1 + r)/p. If
she were to choose a level of capital outlay, ki , that is lower than ki∗ , then the
marginal product of capital would be higher than (1 + r)/p. By increasing
capital outlay by a small magnitude, ∆ki , the capitalist farmer would be able

                                           29
to increase her profit income because

                            pf 0 (ki )∆ki > (1 + r)∆ki .

Hence, a level of capital outlay that is lower than ki∗ would not be chosen by
a capitalist farmer. On the other hand, if she chose a level of capital outlay,
ki , that was higher than ki∗ , then the marginal product of capital would be
lower than (1 + r)/p. Thus, the capitalist farmer could increase her surplus
by moving a small amount of her capital, ∆ki , out of agriculture because

                            pf 0 (ki )∆ki < (1 + r)∆ki .

Hence, a level of capital outlay that is higher than ki∗ would not be chosen by
a capitalist farmer. This implies that, given competitive pressures operating
in capitalist economies, a capitalist farmer would choose her level of capital
outlay which would ensure that the marginal product of capital was exactly
equal to (1 + r)/p.
    Note that the same economy-wide average rate of profit, r, and the same
market price of corn, p, are faced by capitalist farmers on each plot of land.
Since competitive pressures force capitalist farmers to behave in the same
way on each plot of land, the marginal product of capital will be equalized
at (1 + r)/p on each plot of land.
    The condition represented in (9) has an important implication for the
decomposition of ground-rent. Turning to the previous definition of the
marginal-capital plot of land in (2), we can see that once we allow capi-
talist farmers to determine the level of capital outlays using the principle
of surplus maximization, all plots become marginal-capital plots of land.
This is because fi0 (ki ) is equal for each plot. Hence, y m = fi0 (ki ) for each
i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , n(p)}. Using (9), we see further that y m = fi0 (ki ) = (1 + r)/p.
From the expression in (5) it follows that absolute rent, ARi , is zero. In
terms of Figure 6, this means that OF = OE = OG, so that ARi = 0.
    As I have noted above, in the extant literature, there are two interpreta-
tions of Marx’s arguments about the existence of absolute rent. One strand
of Marxist literature argues, in line with Marx’s argument in Chapter 45 of
Volume III of Capital, that the source of absolute rent is the low organic com-
position of capital in agriculture relative to the rest of the economy (Fine,
1979; Fine and Filho, 2010; Fine, 2019). Another strand, also using textual
evidence in its favour, argues that absolute rent arises from the monopoly
of the class of landlords (Ramirez, 2009). The analysis in this section shows

                                         30
Figure 10: Decomposition of ground rent in agriculture on the i-th plot of
land, measured in units of corn, when rent is specified as a lump-sum mone-
tary payment. In this case, there is no absolute rent. Total ground-rent is the
sum of differential rent of first variety (DRI) and differential rent of second
variety (DRII).


that both interpretations are incorrect once we allow capitalist farmers to
choose the level of capital outlay on their plots of land.
      On the one hand, if the organic composition of capital were to rise in the
rest of the economy relative to agriculture, as used in the argument in Fine
(1979), then the uniform rate of profit, r, would fall to r0 , say. Capitalist
farmers would then choose the new level of capital outlay to take this into
account. Their choice would ensure that the marginal product of capital,
fi0 (ki ), is equal to (1 + r0 )/p. Hence, absolute rent would still be zero. The
relatively lower organic composition of capital in agriculture does not gener-
ate any absolute rent. On the other hand, if the class of landlords use their
monopoly power to withhold land from the lease market, this will raise the
price of corn from p to p0 , say. Capitalist farmers would then choose the
level of capital outlay after taking this into account. Their choice will ensure


                                       31
that fi0 (ki ) is equal to (1 + r)/p0 . Thus, absolute rent would still be zero.
Monopoly power of landlords cannot give rise to absolute rent, either.
    I have visually represented the configuration of ground-rent and its de-
composition, when capital outlay is chosen by capitalist farmers to maximize
their surplus, in Figure 10. The total amount of ground-rent on plot i is rep-
resented by the area DCE. This is, as before, the surplus profit. DRIi (p)
is represented, just like in Figure 5, by the area DJI. This is the part of
ground-rent that can be attributed to quality differentials across plots of
land. DRIIi (p) is now represented by the area IJCE. There is no AR.
Thus, we now have a two-part decomposition of ground-rent on the i-th plot
as
                         GRi (p) = DRIi (p) + DRIIi (p) ,
where                                   Z k∗ (p) h
                                             i
                                                                        i
                        DRIi (p) =                   fi0 (k) − fn(p)
                                                                0
                                                                     (0) dk,                  (10)
                                         0
and                                Z ki "                     #
                                                    1+r
                  DRIIi (p) =             fi0 (k) −               dk − DRIi (p) .             (11)
                                    0                     p
   Let us now determine the components of ground-rent on the two plots.
On both plots of land, we know that the marginal product of capital is exactly
equal to (1 + r)/p. Hence, y m , the minimum marginal product of capital at
the given levels of capital outlay on the two plots is exactly equal to (1+r)/p.
Using (5), we see, therefore, that the absolute rent is equal to zero on both
plots of land.

5.2      Can Absolute Rent be Positive?
Let me now return to the condition that I had implicitly assumed when
analysing rent with exogenous capital outlays: fi0 (ki ) > (1 + r)/p. This
assumption was crucial for generating positive amount of absolute rent on
the i-th plot of land (see equation 5).6 The importance of this assumption
can be visually seen from Figure 6 and 7. This assumption implies that
there is a ‘gap’ between the marginal product of capital outlay, fi0 (ki ), and
the opportunity cost of capital outlay, (1 + r)/p. Thus, only when there is a
gap between fi0 (ki ) and (1 + r)/p, can the i-th plot generate positive AR. If
   6
     I had assumed that fi0 (ki ) > (1 + r)/p for i = 1, 2, . . . , n. This ensured that y m , which
is the minimum fi0 (ki ) across the n plots, was also larger than (1 + r)/p.


                                                 32
there are mechanisms available in a capitalist economy that can put a wedge
between the marginal product of capital outlay and the opportunity cost of
capital outlay, then it can generate positive absolute rent.
    The two main contenders for explaining absolute rent are the relatively
low organic composition of capital and the class power of landlords. In a
previous sub-section, I have argued that a relatively low organic composition
of capital cannot generate any wedge between the marginal product of capital
outlay and the opportunity cost of capital outlay. Hence, a relatively low
organic composition of capital cannot be the source of absolute rent. I have
also argued that if we understand the exercise of the monopoly power of
landlords as consisting in their ability to withhold land from the lease market,
even then we will not have any absolute rent. Now, I would like to investigate
another channel for the exercise of the class power of landlords: influencing
taxation of capital by the State.
    Suppose the state taxes capital outlays at the rate of t > 0. Then, the
capitalist farmers choice problem would become

                     max pfi (ki ) − GRi − tki − (1 + r)ki ,
                       ki

so that the optimal choice of capital outlay would satisfy the condition that
                                             1+r+t
                              fi0 (ki∗ ) =         .                         (12)
                                               p
Since t > 0, this would ensure that fi0 (ki∗ ) > (1 + r)/p. Hence, using (5), we
can see that there is positive absolute rent. Moreover, we can also see that the
absolute rent is just be the tax revenue collected by the state: ARi = tki∗ /p. If
the class of landlords were strong enough to ensure that the state redistributes
the tax revenue, tki∗ /p, to them, then we could consider it to be absolute rent.
Thus, there seems to be some justification for the claim that class power of
landlords can generate absolute rent. But this is only apparently correct.
                                                                    ∗          ∗
    To see the problem with the class power argument, let ki,T         and ki,N  T
denote the optimal capital outlays on the i-th plot of land with and with-
out taxation of capital outlay, respectively. The first order condition in (9)
               ∗         0 ∗
determines ki,N  T as, fi (ki,N T ) = (1 + r)/p; and the first order condition in
                    ∗
(12) determines ki,T   as fi0 (ki,T
                                ∗
                                    ) = (1 + r + t)/p. The concavity of fi (.) and
                                        ∗       ∗
the fact that t > 0 implies that ki,N     T > ki,T . Thus, when there is taxation
of capital outlays, it will lead to a lower level of capital outlay. This would,
in turn, lead to a loss of ground-rent for the class of landlords. This loss is

                                         33
represented by the area JCF in Figure 11. Therefore, it seems likely that
if the class of landlords were strong enough to impact public policy, they
would in fact push for removing the taxation of capital outlays, rather than
ensuring the redistribution of the tax revenue towards themselves (and call
it absolute rent). We already know, of course, that if there is no taxation of
capital outlays, then absolute rent would be zero.
    In the mid-19th century, when Marx turned his attention to the prob-
lem of absolute rent, feudal obligations were still enforced in many parts of
Germany. One could perhaps think of these feudal obligations as taxes on
capital, which would then explain why Marx theorised about absolute rent.
It might also be argued that once landlords became capitalist revenue max-
imizers, they realized that the feudal dues were in fact reducing the total
ground-rent by creating a wedge between the marginal rate of profit in in-
dustry and agriculture. This might have been one of the important factors
that led to the outlawing of feudal obligations.7 In contemporary capitalist
societies, where capitalists are the dominant element in the ruling class, there
do not seem to be any ground for the existence of absolute rent.


6         Price of Corn
So far I have taken the price of the agricultural commodity is given. To
complete the analysis, I need to investigate how this price is determined. To
do so I look at the market for corn and consider factors that affect demand
and supply. Suppose the demand function for corn is given by D (p; γ), where
∂D/∂p < 0, p is the price of corn, and γ captures factors like population
growth, urbanization, regulatory aspects of the corn market, etc. that shift
the whole demand curve. The total supply of corn can be expressed as
                                             n(p)
                                             X
                                   S (p) =          fi (ki (p)) .          (13)
                                             i=1

Note that total supply of corn is an upward sloping function of price for two
reasons. First, the actual number of plots in use for agricultural production
is a function of p, i.e. n = n(p). I had commented on this assumption right
at the outset, and it is now clear why this was important. The dependence of
the number of plots of land in use is a function of the price of corn because as
    7
        I would like to thank Duncan Foley for pointing this out.


                                              34
                 f’i(k)
                                          Ki,T*: optimal choice when
                                          capital outlay is taxed
                D
                                          Ki,NT*: optimal choice when
                                          no taxation of capital outlay


                I                                 J



                E                                           C
                                              F



                                              K             H
                                              Ki,T*        Ki,NT*            k
                    O



Figure 11: A comparison of the total ground-rent on the i-th plot with and
without taxation of capital outlay.


the price of corn rises, it makes worse plots of land profitable to bring under
cultivation. Second, on any plot in use, we know that ki is an (increasing)
function of p, so that output is an (increasing) function of price, i.e. fi (ki (p)).
Hence, total supply, S (p) is an (increasing) function of p.
    The equilibrium price of corn is the level of p = p∗ which brings supply
and demand into balance, i.e.
                                                  n(p∗ )
                              ∗          ∗
                                                           fi (ki (p∗ )) .
                                                  X
                          D (p ; γ) = S (p ) ≡                                   (14)
                                                  i=1

To ensure that my model is properly closed, let me conduct a simple counting
argument. On the one hand, when there is no taxation of capital outlays,
the model is captured by (12) and (14). There are n + 1 equations because
(9) gives us n equations and (14) gives us one more. The model has n + 1
endogenous variables, k1 , . . . , kn , p∗ , and one exogenous variables, r. Hence,
the equation system can be solved to arrive at the equilibrium magnitudes of
all the endogenous variables. On the other hand, when the state taxes capital

                                             35
outlays, the model is captured by (12) and (14). There as n + 1 equations
and n + 2 endogenous variables, k1 , . . . , kn , t, p∗ . Once we choose a value of
t = t∗ , the model is closed and we can solve for all the endogenous variables.
    I can now present the condition under which any plot of land will be in
use in a capitalist economy with landed property, i.e. private ownership of
land by the class of landlords. In such a context, any plot of land will be in
use if it can be leased in profitably by a capitalist farmer. It can be leased in
profitably only when it pays a positive amount of ground-rent to the landlord
in addition to ensuring the uniform rate of profit for capital investment. Let
us consider the most extreme case when the demand for corn is so low that
even the ‘best’ plot of land cannot be profitably used. In this situation, there
will be no corn production and hence there will be zero ground-rent. This
immediately identifies the minimum threshold for the price, if rent is to be
positive, as
                                         1+r
                                   p∗∗ = 0 ,                                   (15)
                                         f1 (0)
where, it is to be recalled from Assumption 2 that plot 1 is the best quality
plot. If population growth, urbanization, etc. leads to growth of demand for
the agricultural product such that p > p∗∗ , this will bring land under culti-
vation. As soon as any land is brought under cultivation, this will generate
positive ground-rent. As demand rises further, progressively more (worse
plots) land will come under cultivation and total ground-rent will increase.


7     Conclusion
In this paper I have offered a simple mathematical framework to conceptual-
ize Marx’s ideas about ground-rent. In developing the analysis of this paper,
I have extended the discussion in two recent, noteworthy attempts to clarify
Marx’s theory of ground-rent, Basu (2018, 2021) and Das (2018). Previous
attempts to discuss Marx’s theory of ground-rent has been marked by dis-
agreements and confusions partly because of the difficulty in clearly defining
the meaning of the terms involved in the discussion, especially the compo-
nents of ground-rent (Fine, 1979; Ramirez, 2009; Fine and Filho, 2010). In
this respect, Basu (2018) and Das (2018) advanced the literature by try-
ing to clearly specify Marx’s ideas, avoid unnecessary exegetical debate, and
formalize the ideas in simple mathematical models.
    In this paper, I have extended the analysis further by endogenising the

                                        36
capital outlay on each plot of land using a simple and intuitive profit max-
imising principle to model the behaviour of capitalist farmers. This simple
extension has far reaching conclusions. My analysis shows that total ground-
rent can be decomposed into differential rent of the first variety, differential
rent of the second variety and absolute rent only when capital outlays are
taken to be exogenously given. As soon as we endogenize capital outlays
using the principle of profit maximisation, the decomposition of ground-rent
changes. While we always have differential rent of the first and second va-
rieties, the existence of absolute rent now depends on whether the marginal
product of capital outlay across all plots of land is greater than the oppor-
tunity cost of investing capital outside agriculture. In general, competitive
pressure will force capitalist farmers to be profit maximizers. When capital-
ist farmers base their decision about how much to invest on a plot of land so
as to maximize their surplus, they will choose a level of capital outlay that
equates the marginal product of capital outlay and the opportunity cost of
investing capital in agriculture. Thus, absolute will be zero. I have argued
in this paper that neither a relatively low organic composition of capital in
agriculture nor the class power of landlords can, in general, ensure positive
absolute rent.


References
M. Ball. Differential rent and the role of landed property. International
 Journal of Urban and Regional Research, 1:380–403, 1977.

Deepankar Basu. The Logic of Capital: An Introduction to Marxist Eco-
  nomics. Cambridge University Press, 2021. Forthcoming.

Deepankar Basu. Marx’s analysis of ground-rent: Theory, examples and ap-
  plications. Working Paper 2018-04, Department of Economics, University
  of Massachusetts Amherst, 2018.

Debarshi Das. A model of the marxist rent theory. Working Paper 2018-10,
  Department of Economics, University of Massachusetts Amherst, 2018.

Ben Fine. On Marx’s Theory of Agricultural Rent. Economy and Society, 8
  (3):241–278, 1979.



                                      37
Ben Fine. Marx’s rent theory revisited? landed property, nature and value.
  Economy and Society, 48(3):450–461, 2019.

Ben Fine and Alfredo Saad Filho. Marx’s Capital. Pluto Press, fifth edition,
  2010.

A. Haila. The theory of land rent at the crossroads. Environment and
  Planning D: Society and Space, 8(3):275–296, 1990.

Heinz D. Kurz. Rent theory in a multisectoral model. Oxford Economic
  Papers, 30(1):16–37, 1978.

E. Mandel. Marxist Economic Theory. Merlin Press, London, UK, 1962.

Karl Marx. Capital: A Critique of Political Economy, Volume III. Penguin,
 1993. (First published in 1894).

Luigi L. Pasinetti. Lectures on the Theory of Production. Columbia Univer-
  sity Press, New York, NY, 1977.

M. D. Ramirez. Marx’s theory of ground rent: A critical assessment. Con-
 tributions to Political Economy, 28(1):71–91, 2009.

Callum Ward and Manuel B. Aalbers. Virtual special issue editorial essay:
  ‘The shitty rent business’: What’s the point of land rent theory? Urban
  Studies, 53(9):1760–1783, 2016.




                                    38
